David Boder: [In English] Chicago, November the 16th, 1950. This is spool 9-40. The...a short interview with a child, Esther Freilich, the daughter of Mrs. Frieda Freilich...of whom we have that long interview, reported in the book as, eh...”Mrs. Freich.” Boder.
David Boder: Now for a short statement...eh...Esther...Esther Frieden...was hat?
Esther Freilich: Freilich.
David Boder: Esther Freilich, whose mother has covered Spool 36, 37 and 38. Esther is 13 years old.
David Boder: [In German] So, Esther, tell me [unintelligible] what is your name and how old are you?
Esther Freilich: My, my name is Esther Freilich. I am [unintelligible, already?] thirteen years old.
David Boder: You are [unintelligible]. When was your birthday?
Esther Freilich: On March 11th.
David Boder: On March 11th, you turned thirteen years old.
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: Yes. So, Esther, tell me, err, you have been taken with your mother how many times?
Esther Freilich: Oh, three, four times.
David Boder: Three, four times
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: Err, tell me, how was...how was it in Drancy. Were you in Drancy?
Esther Freilich: Yes. I was in the Drancy.
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: I come at [unintelligible] at two o’clock at night. In [unintelligible] and we do in the Commissariat. In, err, Commissariat is preparing. And afterwards we do take the train and we ride to Drancy.
Esther Freilich: We are walking.
David Boder: So, who came to your home, to get you and when was this?
Esther Freilich: The French Poli...Police.
David Boder: The Police came. At what time?
Esther Freilich: Two o’clock of the night.
David Boder: At two o’clock at night.
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: And what did they tell you?
Esther Freilich: The told me that [unintelligible]. We were to prepare our packages, where they [unintelligible]. Where [unintelligible]...
David Boder: [unintelligible]
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: Well, and what kind of packages did you prepare?
Esther Freilich: Err, we taked, what one thinks, the necessary.
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: But they said, we could not [unintelligible]...
Esther Freilich: Because, err, [unintelligible]
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: We had understood, when we went...we taked, what they thought...meant...we could...
David Boder: Uh, hm. And where was your father? Where is the...?
Esther Freilich: Our father, he worked at nights.
David Boder: I see. Well, and who went then, your mother and who else?
Esther Freilich: Mother, my brother and I.
David Boder: Yes, and you. Well? Then you were taken to the Commissariat.
Esther Freilich: Yes. At the Commissariat they looked at [unintelligible]
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: The [unintelligible]
Esther Freilich: [unintelligible]
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: I went with Mama...she was then gone to Drancy...
David Boder: And the brother?
Esther Freilich: With the brother.
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: They left to Drancy. I was a big [unintelligible]....
Esther Freilich: Big! And...
David Boder: Yes, how did you go to Drancy?
Esther Freilich: By autobus.
David Boder: By autobus. Yes and then?
Esther Freilich: Then we came to Drancy. Had [unintelligible] also taken, the...because of the command.
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: And we waited in a, err, a big, err, house. And [unintelligible] all things.
Esther Freilich: She took everything. And [unintelligible], the me...the men, they said then, the women...
David Boder: Yes, and where did they take your brother?
Esther Freilich: The brother?
David Boder: To the men...?
Esther Freilich: Yes, to the men.
David Boder: And you stayed with...
Esther Freilich: With mother.
David Boder: Yes. Well, tell me, what is there happened?
Esther Freilich: That was...there...then I...[unintelligible]...one bed on top of the other..
David Boder: Yes. Where did you sleep?
Esther Freilich: With mother.
David Boder: You slept by your mother.
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: And what did they give you to eat?
Esther Freilich: At first I was with mother [unintelligible]...
David Boder: Hmm, yes, with your mother at [unintelligible]...
Esther Freilich: Also there and [unintelligible] children. Then they were all [unintelligible] sent to the Red Cross and [unintelligible, sounds like “Aral”]...
David Boder: Hmm.
Esther Freilich: They, err, all sent to [unintelligible, sounds like “Aral”], because the children were sick. The children had a big camp, all children went with. With the...there, there was coffee and a miller...
David Boder: Hmm. Yes...
Esther Freilich: And there was bread...
David Boder: I see...
Esther Freilich: And a little [unintelligible, sounds like “Polish”] doll.
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: And, err, then they, err, deported.
Esther Freilich: They gi...give a little, err, flour to the children.
David Boder: A little bit of flour.
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: For the deported children?
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: Well....
David Boder: Well, and err, what happened to you then?
Esther Freilich: To me? We were...yes, err...[unintelligible, sounds like “averted”]
David Boder: What [unintelligible]...
Esther Freilich: The Police. Did just [unintelligible] and had there their...[unintelligible]
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible, sounds like “Stollwitz”]. Took it from me.
David Boder: Hmm.
Esther Freilich: And this guy left...from Drancy...was deported to Germany.
David Boder: Who? The other people?
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: And you and your brother left.
Esther Freilich: I with my brother, with the, err, err, mother, with other family...we left...and also a little animal.
David Boder: Yes, why did you leave?
Esther Freilich: Because my father David had [unintelligible] learned...
David Boder: I see.
Esther Freilich: And while, while the, err, flu...laughed except [unintelligible], you understand?
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: No?
David Boder: Well? What else to you want to tell me?
Esther Freilich: I want tell you....me...because [unintelligible] of Paris. I was [unintelligible]. I was used to...[unintelligible]. So, I saw that children are playing in the streets.
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible]...sorry. I didn’t [unintelligible]...
David Boder: Why not?
Esther Freilich: The police didn’t let me. Forbidden in Germany. Children [unintelligible] in the cinema.
David Boder: Yes. The Jewish children.
Esther Freilich: Yes, Jewish children.
David Boder: Did you meet, err...[unintelligible]?
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible].
David Boder: The [unintelligible] you met?
Esther Freilich: Yes. I also [unintelligible, sounds like “head”]...I still have...[unintelligible]
David Boder: Yes, you have to show me next time.
Esther Freilich: I will show...[unintelligible]...had [unintelligible]
David Boder: Yes. And, err, did they let you play in the garden?
Esther Freilich: No, no, they didn’t.
David Boder: Did you go to school?
Esther Freilich: Only four days. [Unintelligible]...the last moment I was [unintelligible]. I had [unintelligible], because, err, [unintelligible]...in school [unintelligible]. And me, I didn’t know that [unintelligible]
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: Do you understand? I didn’t go then.
David Boder: I see. [Unintelligible]. That is where you lived. Who was there? Your father or your mother?
Esther Freilich: No, I was there alone. Two years I was alone.
David Boder: [Unintelligible]...Two years you were alone?
Esther Freilich: [My parents no know...unintelligible]
David Boder: Why? Who sent those to you there?
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible].
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: Didn’t tell her that...she knows a young woman...
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible]...claimed
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: Yes, I traveled. Mother...[unintelligible]...because I didn’t know what mother had done...I thought, mother was long gone to Germany.
David Boder: Which mother?
Esther Freilich: My mother.
David Boder: Why?
Esther Freilich: Because I didn’t know what mother...I didn’t know how to write.
David Boder: Oh! You didn’t know how to write!
Esther Freilich: Yes! Because, err, mother had written [unintelligible]...err, I wrote...well, my, err...letters...
David Boder: Yes, yes.
Esther Freilich: The woman in the camp, she wrote, when I was coming. All, err, to the “gare” [she probably means: train station] with false documents.
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible]
Esther Freilich: And I, I [unintelligible] you win a basket and there were four thousand soldiers.
David Boder: Who said that?
Esther Freilich: I did. I am [unintelligible].
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible].
David Boder: And so then you left?
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: To where?
Esther Freilich: I went home. Mother came with the things.
David Boder: I see. And then?
Esther Freilich: After two years. I came back from Paris.
David Boder: I see. When did your mother come to look for you? When the Germans had already left?
Esther Freilich: No, and [unintelligible].
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible].
Esther Freilich: Yes, I forgot to say...[unintelligible].
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: So then I went to [unintelligible]...
David Boder: You went to [unintelligible] with whom?
Esther Freilich: Yes. With the, err, with mother, with the, err, with my brother and with the sister. The other one...
David Boder: With the other sister.
Esther Freilich: Other sister. With the other sister.
David Boder: Yes, and what happened there?
Esther Freilich: There [unintelligible]...
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: You understand? The train from [unintelligible]...put us on...[unintelligible]
Esther Freilich: And we rode all day and all night...and we couldn’t, err...without we know, without they give us something to...
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible].
Esther Freilich: I had [unintelligible]...I had a plastic...err, seat...
David Boder: Hmm...
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible] and then I went outside.
David Boder: In [unintelligible]?
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: Hmm...
Esther Freilich: And then I went outside, I, I had left the hospital...I didn’t know, what [unintelligible]...
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: What good luck...she already left again, because, err...they wanted to [unintelligible, sounds like “separate”] me...
Esther Freilich: And then I left. The...err...
David Boder: And to whom did you go?
Esther Freilich: To Mama.
David Boder: I see.
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible].
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: And, err, and the thing. And we left at night...they took us out [unintelligible]...
David Boder: Yes, that was again...
Esther Freilich: Yes. We left and the day, I saw, how my sister was deported...
David Boder: Your sister?
Esther Freilich: And she called my name!
Esther Freilich: I saw, how they called the name...my sister left...and I said, I give you something [unintelligible]...
David Boder: I see.
Esther Freilich: I left [unintelligible] and carried her. Afterward the brother went outside again, thought, they are going to deport him...
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: The mother with the other kids could deported. [Unintelligible].
David Boder: And what are you doing now?
Esther Freilich: I don’t know? Now?
David Boder: Yes.
Esther Freilich: What do I want to do?
David Boder: Yes. What?
Esther Freilich: [Unintelligible].
David Boder: Yes, but are you going to school right now? Are you studying...?
Esther Freilich: Naw, now I go to school for Ge....
David Boder: Yes, but before you came, did you go to...
Esther Freilich: School.
David Boder: Which school?
Esther Freilich: I went to...err, the [unintelligible].
David Boder: Yes, to French school?
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: With French kids?
David Boder: And are they good to, err, to you?
Esther Freilich: They are...well, one kid wrote, “you dirty Jew”...
David Boder: No! And the teach...who is the teacher?
Esther Freilich: The teacher doesn’t...a French woman...she doesn’t like me.
David Boder: Why not?
Esther Freilich: I don’t know. She doesn’t like everybody.
David Boder: Oh! How many Jews are there in your class?
Esther Freilich: In my class, there are four Jews...[unintelligible].
David Boder: Four Jews. And nobody noticed that [unintelligible]?
Esther Freilich: No.
David Boder: Well, and, err, how long do you have to go to school for?
Esther Freilich: One year.
David Boder: One year and then what will you do?
Esther Freilich: And then I’ll go to the other school, a German school.
David Boder: What do you learn?
Esther Freilich: I [unintelligible], err, what I’m learning? The machine.
David Boder: What machine?
Esther Freilich: Err, shorthand.
David Boder: Oh! You are learning the machine in order to write?
Esther Freilich: Yes.
David Boder: Well, you’ll learn that.
David Boder: [In English] Alright. This concludes a short [unintelligible]...Freilich, whose mother insisted that the child be interview— [unintelligible]...appeal. And, eh [unintelligible] now all her difficulties at school are due to the fact that she is Jewish. Eh, this is, eh, August the 9th, taken at...number 9 Rue de Patin, the home for aged Jews. The child is a child of a concierge here at the place. And, umm, this concludes the recording...wire recording of Illinois Institute of Technology.